In this video we are going to look into the mathematics of general relativity, we are
going to build up the basics of the foundation of the mathematics step by step one by one
so that we can understand all the components, the detailed structures, the space-stand curvature,
tensors, everything related to general relativity.
I am keeping this video to be as simple as possible and I will make the formulations
of mathematics pretty simple using analogies which are very easy to understand so that
we can get to the basic root and understand the concepts of relativity using the mathematics
involved in it.
My name is Shaughnak and you are watching this video on my channel physics for students
seasons ratings and a warm welcome to watch this video.
So before we go ahead and start watching these details of the video let us look into what
are the topics that we are covering.
So yes we are covering Euclidean geometry then we will move to Euclidean metric covering
Newton's law, what is gravitational, gravitational field, how gravitational field and Christophers
symbols are related to each other then understanding a very important concept which is called a
connection, what is the geometric meaning of Christophers symbols and Christophers symbols,
how are they written in terms of the metric and finally we will summarize what we have
learned.
So first we start with the Greek philosopher and geometer Euclid, Euclid was an ancient
Greek mathematician active as a geometer and logician considered to be the father of geometry
he is chiefly known for the elements treatise which established the foundation of geometry
that largely dominated the field until early 19th century.
So here are a few of the key results of Euclidean geometry, the internal angles of a triangle
add up to 180 degrees, two straight lines that are initially parallel can be extended
which is known as Euclidean fifth postulate or the parallel postulate area of the circuit
is given by pi r squared and the Pythagoras theorem which is the length of the hypotenuse
hypotenuse squared equal to b squared plus perpendicular square.
This is something elementary which we learned in the schools but as you understand mathematics
is always built by adding one concept on the other so it is good to look into that.
Okay so we move on to the next part where we can define a space where Euclidean geometry
works which is known as Euclidean space, now it can be two dimensional or example this
tabletop or it can be a three dimensional or example a cube.
Now working on the approximation to the ordinary space that we look at.
So this may be a statement of the obvious but we will see that Euclidean space is just
not one of many possible spaces curved surfaces for examples are not Euclidean on the surface
of a sphere for example lines of longitude start of parallel onto equator but meet at
the poles.
Now in relativity we deal with two types of four dimensional Euclidean space the first
is the flat spacetime or special relativity where Euclid's parallel postulate holds and
the curved spacetime of general relativity.
So returning to Euclidean space Pythagoras theorem can also be used in three dimensional
dimensions to calculate the corner of the opposite length of a rectangular cuboid.
So what we do is that we will use this cuboid ABC and we just define this length as 1, 1
and 2 and just keep it simple just to give you the basic idea so that you can understand.
So here we take the 2 square plus 1 square plus the height, width and breadth and from
there we calculate square root of 6 which eventually results into 2.45.
Okay so now why I showed you this because if we take the same cuboid from here and we try
to use this same thing so we get L square equal to A square plus B square plus C square.
So what happens is that using the condition coordinates in three dimension which is as
written the distance or the distance between two points x, y, y1, z1, x2, y2, z2 can be
given as this right or what I can do is that alternatively in terms of the interval I can
write as delta L square equal to delta x square plus delta y square plus delta z square. Now
why I am showing you this delta you will soon understand because this is the first notion
we are trying to use the Euclidean geometry in three dimensional space and this is known
is to be the space has to be Euclidean I mean to say in order to make it true and
this applies for any interval when it is working for Euclidean space right and this is what we
arrived to the first fundamental important mathematical concept which is called the metric.
So I mean to say the metric is basically a function defines distance between two points however this
interval actually applies when it is working remember in Euclidean space.
Okay so we now move to the second part of our video where we will be working a little bit
on the Euclidean metric which is equally important for us to learn. Now as I told you the metric is
a function that defines the distance between two points in a particular space once we know the
metric of a space obviously theoretically at least we can know everything about the geometry
of the space what is the metric or you know it's fundamental important. So because of the nature
of the Euclidean space the distance function is constant it doesn't matter where it changes so
this one if you say that this is constant due to the nature of the space that means that we can
plug in any values of x1, x2 minus x1, y2 minus 1 and so on and end up with the correct answer
and the distance between points x1, x2, y2 and z2. So now this is something which is not
same for other species. This is not same for other species but the distance function is
I mean to say is not constant so to get over this problem we now introduce a kind of a
new notion which is this one dLx, dLy, dLx, dx and dy and what we call these dLx, dLdxy,
dyz all those and it's a four-dimensional etc. This would be what it's called coordinate
differences although we discard dL it is dx, dy and z. So these are called coordinate
differences and when we used to describe the distance between two infinitesimal close points
in space we call this distance as line element I mean to say this is between when it is two
infinitesimal close point it is called line element. So the Euclidean line element in Cartesian
coordinates this is the so this is represented as this one and let me let me go back to that.
Yeah so this is the Euclidean line element which is represented in Cartesian coordinates
where we are taking dL equals so that is the length equals to dx square plus dy square plus dz
square which is exactly the same as l square is equal to x2 minus x1 and so on which is the same
in the Cartesian coordinates but in case of a curved space we need to understand something
in a differential way so we are using those. Okay so now let us see that if this dL is
equal to dx square for dy square so what happens is that you see this one into dx square term
and one to dy square term and one to dz squares come these are actually the matrix coefficients
right so we can arrange them so these are one this one this one these are basically coefficients so
dx multiplied by this one equals to one and so on right so that is how it is so we can on all
other products remains the same so we can arrange them and it looks like a nice kind of a matrix
like this right so this matrix actually tells us how to multiply the differentials dx dy dz
and we can see this in this kind of a matrix right now seeing that dx into dx times dx equals to one
and dy times dy equals to one and dz times dz equals one all other products of dx dy and dz dz
equals to zero so the indices if you identify i j and g by reference of rows and columns
so this is the one which comes when we write now note that here is a bracket
which means that we are referring specifically to the entire matrix and not to individual
components so this is just a convention right so here it goes g one equals to one one g two two
equals to one and g one three equals to zero and so on okay so this is something important when we
are representing this into Euclidean matrix we multiply this coefficients with one in order to
make it in a nice three by three matrix where all other products goes to zero and this bracket denotes
that we are specifically denoting the entire matrix but not to individual component okay
so now we see that this matrix actually helps us to form the metric tensor of general theory of
relativity and this is something which is called a symmetric tensor so g mu nu equals to g nu mu
and yeah so the metric tensor in relativity is symmetric tensor and bilinear in form this mu
nu actually denotes four dimensions of space time and you will also see there are certain duplicate
terms so zero one equals to one zero and so on so this actually reduces from 16 components to 10
components i have shown this pretty clearly in one of my earliest videos on general relativity
called richie tensor richie scalar and metric tensor which is there in the playlist of my general
relativity video if you want you can look into it so this is just a kind of a quick note that
how the 16 components of the metric tensor reduces to 10 components because of the duplicacy and how
this g zero zero etc comes we have just seen these are the coefficients once they are multiplied
it from and forms a line element it can be arranged a matrix right so till now we have
understood what is the metric how it starts with the Euclidean geometry but now we turn to the real
physics and we wait for somewhere someone whose birthday is nearing very soon that is Sir Isaac
Newton and physics as we know is not complete by Newton's law of motion so just a quick glimpse
i mean to say let us not go into that this is again you might say it's the repetition so and the
first law tells that an object would remain at rest until acted upon by external force this is a quick
kind of a you know visual treat that this person is kicking the ball unless acted upon by extra force
so it would strain and we know that inertia is the property of a body to resist and that is called
the law of inertia and the mass of a body is a measure of its inertia and is called the initial
mass so we straight away move to the most important that is the second law of Newton
which states that if a net force acts on an object it will cause an acceleration
of that object and the relationship between an object's mass m and its acceleration a
is given by this famous formula f equals to ma note that f and a i have written it in bold because
i want to make sure that it is a vector notation and it also can be written in scalar notation
right so the first vector form of this law is also states that the force equals the rate of
change of momentum which i have shown p equals to m of v where momentum equals the mass of the
object times its velocity now another way of stating the same law is this one like p equals to
differential of p and t where i take this one further right so we can as you can understand
pretty pretty simple i mean to say nothing more to you know tell and from here we get the si unit
of Newton which is the force required to get given mass and this is one Newton that is a force
required given this is one Newton to move one kg of an acceleration of one meter second square
right so what we get from here we now move on to the second part where we take about from
Newton's law of motion we move into what is called the gravitation right so we again stick to the
laws of Newton that every particle attracts the other particle in a force that is proportional
the product of the mass we all know every point at a mass attracts every other point of mass
by force acting along the line intersecting two points and we know that can be expressed in
this kind of a formula so we know all what it is this g is basically the Newton's constants the
gravitation constant which is written over there and it also can be written as this because right
so here what happens is this this is the scalar form and yeah so this r hat is basically a unit
vector in the radial distance remember it's a radial distance it's pointing out from the center of
the gravity right from m1 to m2 and the minus sign actually indicates that gravity is a force of
attraction not repulsion all the law refers to point masses it can be shown that spherically
symmetric objects behave gravitationally as if all their mass is concentrated on a central point
we're not going to look much into that rather from gravitation we now move into what is called
gravitational acceleration right so we move ahead with the second law the magnitude and
direction which is given so if an object is freely falling in a gravitational field Newton's second
law tells us that the object's mass must be to be a subject of force and this is for f equals to
ma now the magnitude and direction of the force of a freely falling object is also given by
Newton's law of gravitation right which is this one and we know that experiment shows that the
inertial mass capital M equals to the gravitational mass small m so from here what we can do is that
we can write this part of the equation and then we finally write okay yeah so the acceleration
of a body due to gravity does not depend upon its mass the famous feather and iron experiment
so from here we write this right so this is the mass of the gravitating body for example earth
and the minus sign indicate the acceleration decreases as r increases here it is so we have
till now shown the fundamental result that the acceleration of a body due to gravity
does not depend on the mass I was just telling you that the feather falls as fast as breaks
and so on so we know this experience right so inertial mass m equals to the gravitational mass
m small so we take the gravitational mass forward acceleration forward and this is something which
is a vector description of the gravitational acceleration and this is something which is a
scalar description which is just a kind of a notation to make things clear so okay so when
we are talking of gravitation and acceleration why don't we go into something which is called a
gravitational field now gravitational field as itself it is basically a concept so it is a model
or a concept you can say it is used to explain the influences that may see massive body extends
onto the space around itself producing a force or another massive body so this is the gravitational
field basically kind of a concept or a model that we physicists use in order to describe things
so the gravitational field which we can call as g of r at any point small r is a space defined by
the gravitational force felt by a unique mass at a plot place at a point r so this is a kind of a
gravitating body for example you can consider this to be earth I've just given at m so and what we
can do is that this is a remember just a vector field right because the gravitational force is
moving the unit mass in a radial direction so this is the radial direction and it is found by
taking the vector equation of Newton's law of gravitation which is this one and now what we can
do f equals to minus g same what we can now do is that we can just substitute one okay just a
unit mass for one of the two masses like putting unit mass and what do we get is this right so
here also capital M is the mass of the credit unit in body for example earth so what happens is that
this is a mass of the gravitating body right and we can plot to show the gravitational field
under the uniform this kind of a uniform sphere now we know about divergence right I'm not going
back so I have got a complete video on divergence in the playlist of Maxwell's equations so we
know I mean to say I'm not going to explain those partials right so we made the idea of
divergence we know this it's a vector field so it can be shown that the divergence of the
gravitational field at any point is this one nabler dot g equals to minus 4 pi g rho right
where this rho actually denotes the mass density this is a quick letter there's the mass density
at that particular point and evidently what happens is that if the mass density for example
we are in a space where there is no mass mass density is zero so rho becomes zero and the
divergence also becomes zero right so this is to show you the basic concept of gravitational
field why we are going one by one just steps because this would be required in further approaches
in general activity which we will look now this nabler dot g minus 4 pi g rho is something which
our old prints of mathematics has done which is called galsus law for gravity now galsus law of
gravity is actually also known as galsus flux theorem of gravity and it is a law of physics
that is almost equivalent to Newton's law of gravitation so it is it says it is named after
Carl Fritz Rischkauss and it states that the flux or the surface integral of the gravitational field
over any surface is equal to the mass in close so galsus law for gravity is more convenient sometimes
to work in and Newton so this is what you know the law is just a quick note that the form of
galsus law for gravity is similar to that of galsus law of electrostatics in the maximal
equations so galsus gravity has the same mathematical relation to Newton that galsus law for electrostatics
beers with the coulomb's law so I mean to say just I wanted to make things clear so we take a
quick note on understanding these component by component so this one is the any closed surface
this is the differential area this g is the gravitational field this 4 pi is the area of sphere
now we are not going to take a derivation why it is 4 pi because it's 4 pi r square some of this
got cancelled 4 pi g is the gravitational constant and m is the total mass so we come to this one
same so this is the divergence this is the gravitational constant and this is the mass
density at each point so galsus law for gravity actually states in a closed mass in a you know
surface integral over a closed surface so it is good point to quickly recollect galsus law gravity
also I'm going to say this is this is equally important right so this is the differential
form of galsus law the earlier the left hand side is the integral form of galsus law but taking from
here ahead what we need to also understand that is the core of the today's video that is gravitational
potential and how it is related to christophal symbols so a name after elvin pruno christophal
so we will now look a little bit deep into what is the gravitational potential now the gravitational
potential as we know is denoted by this Greek letter phi right this is the gravitational potential
so it is actually is defined as the work done in bringing a unit mass to that point that particular
point right from an infinite place infinity so what we can say in other words that phi is the
gravitational potential energy of unit mass now when we talk about gravitational potential energy
the equation that immediately comes in our mind is this one right so potential energy is this we
already know that from our school physics again letting one of the masses equal to one kilogram
for example we put this we can define the gravitational potential field which is a scalar
field as this one right phi equals to this should be not minus i'm sorry it should be minus gm by r
and if we take a kind of a point at a distance r from the point mass yeah so for a for a point at a
distance r from the point on the center and outside the uniform sphere of mass m so if the sphere has
the radius capital r right this one would be true right this one would be true so for instance inside
a uniform spherical mass if I take this one right the inside you can see this one right this one
so for inside a uniform spherical mass that is for small r this one if I take the small this this
holds for r which is greater than r but in case that we take a uniform mass where small r is less
than bigger right so this is actually what happens a little bit you know it comes up the
derivation so phi equals to minus gm to r cube thanks that I have written this time correct
so right and now what we can do is that yeah so this is r 3 r square minus r square yeah
so this holds actually then small r is less than big r and this holds phi equals to it should be
minus gm by r anyway so if r is bigger than greater than equals to r like so at a point
m at a distance r from the center and outside a uniform sphere of mass this happens and inside
for a point uniform mass that it is inside this happens right okay so we now take a step back
and we want to go back to that cuboid concept now why because we want to understand something
which is called the magnitude of a position vector so if we take you know these lines right
and what we get from here is that position vector or radial vector r from the origin o
so we get this one right we already know this so we know that r equals to this one x square root
of the radical of x square plus y square so in Cartesian coordinates we can now you know rewrite
the gravitational potential which was this one phi equals to minus gm by r thankfully I have corrected
this here right so equals to minus gm so this is the Cartesian coordinate I just wanted to
take these example of skew cube so that we understand that how the square root of the denominator
comes now also note that we use this nabla operator this differential operator and this is
basically used for three reasons it calculates the divergence gradient and curl now if we use
this nabla which is of a scalar field phi then what we get is this one right so what we get is
this one I think this this this part is quite clear so we take this value okay this one yeah
this is the gradient obviously so what we do is that in ordinary Euclidean space for a point a scalar
phi the gradient is the vector points so we take this one this is the partial differentials and then
we get this one right then we use the differential operator and we get this value calculating further
we get this value now I am not explaining it right now because this requires a kind of a
differential operator calculate which you can just check on the equations so we further go and
we get this and now what we do is that we get ultimately the answer is this as because this
small r equals to the modulus of this what we can do is that we can write yeah this one I mean to
say this equal as this right and now by definition r equals to x y z equals to this this is by
definition yeah given r so it denotes an ordinary Cartesian vector right and so the basis vectors
are implied and we know that we don't bother to show them so some now we can rewrite this one
it gets cancelled off this one r cube and all this gets cancelled off and we finally arrive into this
and this is how it is treated right so now we what we do is that we find this one
so this part is actually this part right so this is okay let me explain you again so now
we have found an equation that relates the gravitational potential field with that of the
gravitational field because this the right hand side of it is equals to this which we have dealt
earlier so this is the phi the gravitational potential field which is a scalar field and this
is the gravitational field which is a vector field and somehow there's a relation between these two
fields and finally what we do is that it's a gravitational field so if g we replace it by
nabla phi and we get this right so you can check on to this part I mean to say this is pretty simple
I just trying to get in a kind of relation between the potential gravitational potential
field which is a scalar with a vector and we use those differential operators in order to get this
so till now what we have learned is that the gravity the gravitational potential
and also we looked into how you know the gravitational potential field can be used
in order to make a construct of a sphere where the solid sphere is inside and outside so I hope
by but this is okay now the problem is that when we're dealing with general theory of relativity
gravitational potential etc what the geometry changes with curve space time and with curve
space time we need a different tool in order to establish a kind of a connection so that is what
the christophal symbols does so in general again you will get a wrong notion that christophal
symbols denotes gravity or gravitation potential it does in a different way so christophal symbols
represent the connection coefficients of the levy-chivita connection don't worry in coming to
that and they describe a change in the basis vectors through a given coordinate and it represents
the fictitious forces induced by a non-initial frame of reference initial frame a non-initial
frame which is moving so what we are trying to make a point over here is that when the basis of
the vectors we will soon see examples changes then we need a kind of a connection and the
christophal symbols actually does that but before that we'll very quickly take a look
in what is called an affine connection so the notion of affine connection has its root in the
19th century geometry I mean to say 10 sensor calculus it was developed later in the 1920s
by Eli Carter right and Harman Weil so the many invariants of an affine connection are its torsion
and curvature this is a photo you know illustration of torsion so you can see these are the tangent
vector fields which connects and it can be differentiated okay so I will go step by step
what I'm trying to make a point is that see in Riemannian or any pseudo Riemannian geometry we
deal with manifolds right this manifold each of these manifolds are characterized by what is called
an affine connection they do have an affine connection right now the manifolds also is
characterized by what is called a metric tensor which measures the causal structure of space time
and many other things we know what is a metric tensor now these type of manifolds who have a
metric tensor they are actually called Riemannian manifolds right those who have a metric tensor
now these Riemannian manifolds also have what is called an affine connection and these affine
connections are called Levy-Civita connection right is named by Tulio Levy I don't remember the name
of Civita right now but Tulio Levy-Civita Levy-Civita connection so the Levy-Civita connection I can
tell it is a very special case of an affine connection obviously it is the affine connection
for a manifold with a metric right so it is basically an affine connection of a manifold
with a metric now what happens typically is that we need this affine connection or I would say
that affine connection is already there because it connects the nearby tangent basis so that we can
differentiate and do a better connection and Levy-Civita connection is basically
a special affine connection which we will see soon how it behaves
okay so now we take a quick look but I was telling that we need a special tool what is
that that is called a connection now what happens is that in in the case of transporting local
geometric objects from a place to others etc tangent vectors and tensor so we need a long
family of curves in a parallel and consistent manner so a choice of an affine connection is also
equivalent to the notion of what is called a parallel transport which is a method of transporting
tangent vectors along curves now I will just use the analogy which I have used earlier in my videos
also that how will you understand which one is bigger I mean to say simple concept of
found rates so if we put one another arrow on the other and it overlaps then it is bigger
this is obviously the smaller one right now what do we do it is a way of comparing vectors at
different positions of manifold I mean to say the connection actually does what the parallel
transport helps it's a way of transporting detail and smooth surfaces so let me quickly you know
explain with that so here is a triangle and I've got a point this one red I'm trying to move
I'm trying to keep it as safe as possible I do that I do that and then this you see that red
arrow pointing towards right overlaps that that means in flat space when we have parallel
transport of a vector it come back to the original point so we have no problem with that but you know
generativity has got complexities and it has got curvature so we take this kind of a sphere
and we stand over here this is the red point and we're trying to go to the blue point and we're
carrying a kind of a you know spare or a arrow which we try to keep as straight as possible
the original arrow is marked in yellow so I move over from here it is called V and I'm trying to
keep it but you still see that the arrows are bending and this is because due to the curvature
now from this point we try to go from the equator we are trying to keep it as clear as possible so
yeah yeah the direction of the vector is due to the curvature and then from here we try to move
back to a regular place right so we are keeping this as straight as possible here also but this
one when we come back is a V prime which is totally different in the direction
where we started that's the yellow vector so when we take out this yellow vector and this we find
there's a difference V and V prime so parallel transport which is trying to move around the sphere
it tries to make the sphere as constant as possible but it is not so parallel transport cannot
keep vectors and all that we need something which is called a covariant derivative don't worry about
the term I will soon explain you and covariant derivative is a tool which helps us to find
parallel transported vector fields now who will find the parallel transported vector face the
covariant derivative and in connection with another value okay so connections are basically
local geometric objects they allow a comparison between local geometry at one point and local
geometry at another this has got two types of connection one which measures infinite symbols
and another which measures local theory and these are the different type of connections however we
are just dealing with the levy-chivita connection so just to tell you that what actually you know
the connections are okay so we know this is a kind of a covariant derivative and this is being
replaced by the navla operator which is covariant derivative actually what happens is that levy-chivita
connection refers to the covariant derivative what do we mean by covariant derivative I'm not
clearly telling you but it's a kind of a derivative right so in a nice intuitive way to think about
this code you know connection coefficients is to think them that they are corrections of an ordinary
derivative right so because the ordinary derivatives cannot work here because the basis of the vector
changes how it changes I will demonstrate to you soon and levy-chivita connection comes to save this
and do the necessary corrections to an ordinary derivative so let me explain you the components
of this levy-chivita connection so first we go with this right this one is basically the levy-chivita
connection which connects nearby tangent spaces define a corrected notion of the derivative
in arbitrary coordinates or arbitrary variables that means there is something wrong that means
ordinary derivatives are not being happening we are using covariant derivative and in order to do
that there is a tool which is the connection this is the levy-chivita connection right so we
developed the second component which is pretty easy this is basically the ordinary derivative which
basically is defined of a tangent space for example in Cartesian coordinates and this is actually this
gamma term is actually a correction term remember it's a correction term called the connection
coefficient or Christoffel symbol and this is correct the ordinary derivative for an arbitrary
or manifold or infinite system so here note that the indices really doesn't make any sense this was
because the covariant derivative is an operator that needs to act on something so the indices really
doesn't make any sense so all in all this is a connection you understood what is a connection
either it is different with local theory on infinite symbol it is a kind of a connection
which helps us to you know correct the ordinary derivative which is not possible on a curved
manifold okay so these are all mathematical calculations but as always I prefer in the video
to show a geometric meaning of Christoffel symbol so that it becomes clear how it looks like so
geometrically Christoffel symbols can be interpreted as describing how basis vectors changes through
our coordinate system right so the basis vectors may change even due to the coordinate system being
curvilinear or due to the geometry of the space as it is being curved so here I have written the
Christoffel symbols essentially defined as the derivatives of basis vectors okay so here is the
you know kind of a vector and what I'm going to do is that I'm going to explain it so this is how
much the basis vector emu changes when it moves along the x new axis so you can just coordinate
this is actually what is called the dot product however I have got a separate video which deals
with the deep details of what is a dot product and cross product so intuitively understand this
dot product describes how much it is derivative and the basis actually overlaps so it overlaps and
it is absolutely overlap that means that they are the same and so on
okay so I would like to explain you in two geometrically what is the basis vector it changes
and what all those problems are all about so in a flat space we get a vector called a and this is
being measured by the component a y and a x and I if I draw the lines it are more or less the same
and if I take a kind of a curved surface and I plot the same I get a curved surface let's look
yeah something like this so x y goes into x prime and y prime and I'm trying to make this vector
the same but when I'm trying to make the measure of this vector through this component so you see
the x component is something here and the y component goes something here so what happens
is that when I join those I see a prime x is longer than a x we see that a prime y is also
longer than a y and but the a remains invariant right so a remains invariant in the sense that
it doesn't change so this is the problem that the basis of the vectors are changing in curved space
so now let us say that we have some curved coordinate system this is one x1 this would
be t or x2 anything that you like and this is the basis vectors like okay so these are just
you know labeled as e1 e t and e x so what happens is that if you if you really calculate
the dot product which we used to do in UV in a typical Cartesian coordinates the basis
vector changes in the time direction and we cannot do this e dot e equal to the components
we cannot do because you see here in curved space style things are changing
so we take this one and we plot this one as x1 and x2 this is a curved space right
curved coordinate system with x1 x2 but the basis vectors which are these which are e1 and e2
now just try to imagine this is very important imagine that you move along the x1 axis and
see how the basis of vector e2 changes along the x1 axis right so a small change in a vector along
coordinate axis is simply the partial derivative with respect to the particular coordinate obviously
you have to do a partial derivative because it's changing on a curved manifold so this
derivative vector this one we take the red one can also yeah it can also components along the
x1 and x2 axis obviously so this is done by taking the dot product of the red vector
which I will show you this is a derivative vector right and the Christopher symbols are
basically telling how the basis vectors are changing how they're actually changing
okay so we see this one which if I differentiate takes this for equation this one and this one
so all in all if you don't want to go into the mathematical cases of calculating those derivatives
then understand that Christopher symbols geometrically represent different components
of the derivative of basic vectors remember this is the different components of the derivative
of basic vectors because the basis vector changes with the curved spacetime so if you
you were to take the derivative of a basic vector this would give another vector right
so the Christopher symbols then represent the different components of this of this new vector
all these things changes now from this Christopher symbol how the vcs vectors changes and all those
you will see that there is an underlying force which is also working so these are in bold remember
these are corrections to an ordinary derivative okay now if these Christopher symbols which are
corrections in terms of derivative if they are written in the metric form then how it would be
let us have a quick look on that so we know that g mu nu is a metric tensor to define the
geometric concept or on arbitrary coordinate system so we get a kind of a I would say equation like
this we get a kind of a equation like this and don't worry I will just explain to you so you see
these derivatives these are partial derivatives of the metric with respect to the different
you know spacetime coordinates this is the basically the metric when I am writing the
levy chi beta in terms of this metric this is actually happens right and this one is the index
is a summation in it is a summation you know from 0 to 3 for dimension please so what I am trying to
tell make a point over here is that the metric tensor to put simply is used to define different
geometric concepts in arbitrary coordinate system the metric is as you know is denoted by g mu nu
so the Christopher's now the Christopher symbols in the term metric it is thus how it is explained
okay so what we draw a conclusion from here is that gravity is obviously a fictitious force in
generativity Christopher symbols because they are denoting a change in basic vectors anything
that changes it moves so the change of basic vectors obviously will give rise to fictitious
force if I have gone to my earlier videos on geodesics and richie scaler you will find that
how the basis of vectors changes and the geodesics are causing a curvature which is called gravity
in relativity right so the change in basic vector usually gives rise to a fictitious force
the Christopher symbols actually describe what are those fictitious forces and it plays the
role of describing how objects actually move or get accelerated because it is actually showing the
change right and Christopher symbols are gravitational fields in generativity because
it is subject to change so the gravitational potential of Isaac Newton is being replaced by
this one that is g mu nu the metric tensor and the gravitational force field is being replaced by
this Christopher symbol now in order to understand what it is I will like to give you a quick
and a very simple comparison without examples as you understand physics is not complete so
in Newtonian gravity the gravitational field that is the gravitational acceleration at each
point in the field is represented as a vector field right so this g which you can see is defined as
the negative gradient of the gravitational potential that is why it is a minus sign so all these are
partial derivatives of the gravitational potential remember that these are all partial derivatives
of the gravitational potential now if I write this one right you will see these are the partial
derivatives of the metric it's a big difference right so the Newtonian gravitational potential
partial derivatives are the gravitational potential where in generativity partial derivatives are that
of the metric and that is why gravitational potential is replaced by the metric tensor
so I hope yeah you can understand what I'm trying to make it trying to make a point that how this
shift really happens and this the partial derivatives in both the cases these are partial derivatives
in this case Newtonian case it's gravitational potential and this is the metric
okay now there is something which is called a weak field approximation it is just a hypothetical
case when gravity is less and complications are less and things are moving slow you will see that
Christoffel symbols are reduced which looks almost like Newtonian gravitation okay so this is the
geodesic equation of weak field in generativity and you see this one this is the equation of motion
in Newtonian gravity doesn't it look the same in weak field limit and this is the Christoffel symbol
which looks at this limit so finally we come that Christoffel symbols represent gravitational
acceleration in generativity why because it denotes the change of the basis of vectors with that
change it causes the gravitational acceleration okay so just finally I just wanted to show you
that the geodesic equation is basically the second law of Newton and the Einstein field
equation is basically the Poisson's Poisson's equation right so now when we are talking of
Poisson's equation we need to look how Poisson's equation actually reflects Einstein's field
equation and that is basically what is coming up in the next part of our video we are going to
look into Poisson's equation when Causs-Schmidt metric pseudo-remanian manifold geodesics parallel
transport Riemann curvature tensor, Ricci tensor, Ricci scalars, spacetime, geodesics, energy momentum
tensor and finally the Schwarz-Gill metric so yeah the mathematics of generativity will be
intense it will be long so I thought to divide it into different parts so I haven't gone into the
real you know summing up or the summary of this video because it is all mathematical and you know
these concepts really require a summary which you can use to do so this is all I mean to say
we started with you that we moved into gravitational potential and then from gravitational potential
we showed that how this is related to Christoffel symbols further in from Christoffel symbols
how the connection actually holds what are the different connections and so on so I will put
a pause and I would like to thank you for watching this video what you can do is that you can put
up your comment and I will I'm sorry for the minor mistakes in signatures science etc and
that's it please do subscribe to my channel physics for students do like do comment as you do
because these are motivational facts these are motivations which keeps me moving and helps me
to improve on my video do also click on the bell notification click on all to get all the
notification from physics for students thank you very much this is Sean at signing off from
physics for students promising to come back very soon with another interesting video till then
enjoy the winter seasons greetings and best wishes goodbye until next time
now you can be a part of our team you can send your scientific articles essays research papers
lesson plans on a particular subject of science for further details please write to us at
editor at physicsforstudents.com stay safe and happy